---
layout: post
title: Opinions Are Exhausting
date: 2016-12-01 22:00
---

I've never been shy about sharing my opinions, but over the last couple of
years, I've come to realize that formulating, expressing, and defending opinions
on all matters is mentally exhausting. This is the story of how I, a recovering
Devil's Advocate, came to realize this and what I do to combat it.

## The Parable

thoughtbot is well known and respected for its collection of open source
projects. What you may not know is that much of thoughtbot itself is run in a
similar manner to those projects. Our company handbook and sales guides, for
instance, are markdown documents in GitHub repositories. Problems with the way
thoughtbot is run are opened as issues in those repositories and solutions are
proposed and discussed in pull requests.

After more than ten years working at various companies it felt like someone was
_finally_ asking how I thought things should be run. I subscribed to all the
issues and I commented on all the pull requests. If something was being
discussed that I had previously given no thought to, I quickly formulated an
opinion and drafted my response. thoughtbot is ever-evolving and I didn't want
to miss a chance to make it every bit the company I wanted it to be.

Then one day a policy was changed before I had a chance to express an opinion. I
commented that I felt the change was snuck through and that management erred in
not allowing the company as a whole more time to weigh in and decide as a group.
What I hadn't considered at the time was that the person that proposed and
merged the change knew more about why the change was necessary and that it
wasn't appropriate to share that information with a larger audience. Further, it
was, of course, in their job description to know this information and make these
decisions.

Many months later this person expressed that my comment had caused them undue
stress in an already stressful time. I apologized immediately and took a long
hard look at how I had gone so wrong.

Most obviously, I had mistaken my invitation to participate in the process for
the right to help decide all matters of policy. I had also failed to give a
co-worker the benefit of the doubt and acted without tact or empathy.

As I considered how I could prevent this from happening in the future, I
realized that the policy change that spurred this incident was something I
didn't even feel very strongly about. I had likely been more upset that m
